The more objects we need to draw, the more
complicated it becomes to write the code to
calculate where each individual object needs
to be placed. Let's imagine we have a very
simple pattern here and we want to repeat this
pattern multiple times across our canvas. We
could write a loop now and let's say we start
at 0 and we repeat this pattern 10 times.
Now we would need to calculate
using the x variable where each of these objects
needs to be placed, but thanks to p5.js there is
a little tool that helps us do this a lot faster.
And this is the so-called translate function. The
translate function takes three parameters for
x y and z. And translate allows us to move our
coordinate system, the origin of our coordinate
system around, so changing actually where 0/0
is. When we draw something at 0/0 then translate
our coordinate system say 40 pixels to the right,
then the next time we draw something at 0/0,
it will be at 40. So just to demonstrate this,
let's say we move our coordinate system every
time the loop runs 40 pixel to the right.
If i save this, we now have 10 times our little
pattern and we can see that every time the loop
is run, it's moved 40 pixels to the right.
But very important as our code is running,
the translates add up to one another. The
first time i move it 40 pixel to the right,
the next time i say another 40 pixels, it's not
starting at zero, but it's starting at the last
time i use translate. So thereby, we get 40, 80,
etc. We could also do it the other way around,
when we want to return to our zero zero origin
that we had in the beginning, we can do this very
simply, we simply say "push". "Push" stores
our current setup of our coordinate system
and when we want to return to the state that
we saved using "push", we can simply say "pop".
And then we're going back to the one that we
saved through push. So now we have the same code,
but thanks to push and pop, we are always starting
back at the beginning. And you can use push
and pop multiple times inside one another, to
store multiple states, return to states, etc.
So in this case, if i want this to work, i would
need to multiply the 40 times our variable.
And now we get this pattern 40 times
0, 40 times 1, 40 times 2, and so on.
And of course we could also do this for the y
axis. Let's simply add another loop inside here
and change this to the y variable
and add this to our translate.
And now we have drawn the pattern a lot more often
and we don't need to calculate the y parameter,
the x parameter for all our individual
objects, but instead we can simply use
the translate function and, thereby, move
our pattern around. And we could even,
for example, say we want to add a little triangle
here. And triangles are always a bit tricky. If
you need to calculate where exactly the points of
the triangle are. Let's add a triangle here and
let's just use 0,0 5,10 -5,10. I always find it
hard if i'm somewhere in the coordinate system to
actually come up with the numbers for triangles. I
find it a lot more easier if i'm at zero and i can
simply use this kind of mirrored coordinates for
the triangle. To make it easier, i can now simply
use the translate function, to move our triangle
around. Oh, that's a little bit far to the right.
Now i don't need to actually come up with the
correct coordinates for the triangle, but simply
locate it around the zero point and then just use
translate to move it around. And as i said before,
we use push in the beginning and then
we can use all the translates we want
and in the end we use the pop
function. And this will return us
to the state of our coordinate system
that we saved through the push function.